.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.Dd August 10, 2021
.Dt SMCROUTECTL 8 SMM
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm smcroutectl
.Nd Control and status tool for
.Xr smcrouted 8
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm smcroutectl
.Op Fl dptv
.Op Fl I Ar NAME
.Op Fl S Ar FILE
.Op Ar COMMAND
.Pp
.Nm smcroutectl
.Ao help | flush | kill | reload | version Ac
.Nm smcroutectl
.Ao show Ac
.Op groups | routes
.Nm smcroutectl
.Ao add \ | \ \ rem Ac Ao IFNAME Ac Oo SOURCE Oc Ar GROUP[/LEN] IFNAME Op IFNAME ...
.Nm smcroutectl
.Ao join | leave Ac Ao IFNAME Ac Oo SOURCE Oc Ar GROUP[/LEN]
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the friendly control tool for
.Xr smcrouted 8 .
It can be used to query status, debug, reload, and kill a running
.Nm smcrouted .
Commands can be abbreviated to the minimum unambiguous prefix; for
example,
.Cm s g
for
.Cm show groups .
.Sh OPTIONS
The following
.Nm
options are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d
Enable detailed output in show commands.
.It Fl I Ar NAME
Connect to an
.Nm smcrouted
instance that runs with another identity,
.Ar NAME .
.Pp
This option is required for both daemon and client when running multiple
.Nm smcrouted
instances, e.g., when using multiple routing tables, on Linux.
.It Fl p
Use plain table headings in
.Cm show
command output.  No ANSI control characters are used, not even for
probing screen width.
.It Fl S Ar FILE
UNIX domain socket path, used for the IPC between
.Nm
and
.Nm smcroutectl .
Use this to override the default socket path, derived from the daemon
identity,
.Fl I Ar NAME .
This option can be useful when overriding the identity is not
sufficient, e.g. for testing.  The default depends on how
.Nm
is configured at build time, see
.Sx FILES .
.It Fl t
Skip table headings entirely in
.Cm show
command output.
.El
.Sh OPERATION
The
.Ar IFNAME
argument in the below
.Nm smcroutectl
commands is the interface name, or an interface wildcard of the form
.Ar eth+ ,
which matches
.Ar eth0 , eth10 ,
etc.  Wildcards are available for both inbound and outbound interfaces.
.Pp
A multicast route is defined by an input interface
.Ar IFNAME ,
the sender's unicast IP address
.Ar SOURCE ,
which is optional, the multicast group
.Ar GROUP
and a list of, at least one, output interface
.Ar IFNAME [IFNAME ...] .
.Pp
Please refer to
.Xr smcrouted 8 
for more details on the operation and how ASM/SSM multicast works.
.Sh COMMANDS
The following commands are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Nm add Ar IFNAME [SOURCE[/LEN]] GROUP[/LEN] OUTIFNAME [OUTIFNAME ...]
Add a multicast route to the kernel routing cache so that multicast packets
received on the network interface
.Ar IFNAME
originating from the IP address
.Ar SOURCE
and with the multicast group address
.Ar GROUP
is forwarded to the outbound network interfaces
.Ar OUTIFNAME [OUTIFNAME ...] .
The interfaces provided as
.Ar INIFNAME
and
.Ar OUTIFNAME
can be any multicast capable network interface as listed by 'ifconfig'
or 'ip link list' (incl. tunnel interfaces), including loopback.
.Pp
To add a (*,G) route, either leave
.Ar SOURCE
out completely or set it to
.Ar 0.0.0.0 ,
and if you want to specify a range, set
.Ar GROUP/LEN ,
e.g.
.Ar 225.0.0.0/24 .
.It Nm remove Ar IFNAME [SOURCE[/LEN]] GROUP[/LEN]
Remove a kernel multicast route.
.It Nm flush
Flush dynamic (*,G) multicast routes now.  Similar to how
.Fl c Ar SEC
works in the daemon, this client command initiates an immediate flush of
all dynamically install (*,G) multicast routes.  Useful when a topology
change has been detected and need to be propagated to
.Nm smcrouted.
.It Nm join Ar IFNAME [SOURCE[/LEN]] GROUP[/LEN]
Join a multicast group, with optional prefix length, on a given
interface.  The source address is optional, but if given a source
specific (SSM) join is performed.
.It Nm leave Ar IFNAME [SOURCE[/LEN]] GROUP[/LEN]
Leave a multicast group, with optional prefix length, on a given
interface.  As with the join command, above, the source address is
optional.
.It Nm help [cmd]
Print a usage information message.
.It Nm kill
Tell a running
.Nm smcrouted
to exit gracefully, same as
.Ar SIGTERM .
.It Nm reload
Tell
.Nm smcrouted
to reload its configuration and activate the changes.  Same as
.Ar SIGHUP .
Note, any routes or groups added or removed with
.Nm smcroutectl
will be lost.  Only the configuration set in the file
.Pa smcroute.conf
is activated.
.It Nm show [groups|routes]
Show joined multicast groups or multicast routes, defaults to show
routes.  Can be combined with the
.Fl d
option to get details for each multicast route.
.It Nm version
Show program version.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr smcrouted 8 ,
.Xr smcroute.conf 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
SMCRoute was originally created by
.An Carsten Schill Aq Mt carsten@cschill.de .
Initial IPv6 support by
.An Todd Hayton Aq Mt todd.hayton@gmail.com .
Initial FreeBSD support by
.An Micha Lenk Aq Mt micha@debian.org .
.Pp
SMCRoute is currently maintained by
.An Joachim Wiberg Aq Mt troglobit@gmail.com ,
and
.An Micha Lenk Aq Mt micha@debian.org
at
.Lk https://github.com/troglobit/smcroute "GitHub" .
